Title: A Cognitive Architecture for Shared Autonomy in AUV Operations

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.29347v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 00:50:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
# A Cognitive Architecture for Shared Autonomy in AUV Operations 

Niamh Ellis 1,2, Thi Tran 2, Ignacio Carlucho 2 and Yvan R. Petillot 2

Abstract —Operators remain essential to Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) operation, yet often suffer from low situational awareness and high workload, both of which negatively affect safety. This paper presents a cognitive architecture consisting of an ontology and multiple Large Language Models (LLMs) to assist the operator at all stages of the mission. Each LLM is grounded with domain-specific information from the ontology and given a simple role to create a system that can support the operator at all stages of an operation. We are aiming to prove that using the two together will allow decisions to be grounded in the relevant domain knowledge, but also benefit from the reasoning capabilities of the LLM. Our framework determines if a mission is possible for a given Unmanned Underwater Vehicle (UUV), performs mission planning, and executes a given mission in simulation. The operator can be involved in planning and execution, ensuring the resulting plan is valid and that the vehicle behaves safely during execution. We compare different LLMs, Llama3, GPT-OSS, and Qwen2.5, to determine which are best suited to the different roles within our framework. We find that GPT-OSS performs best for feasibility assessment, planning, and execution, while Qwen2.5 is best suited to identifying mission types from natural language input. 

Index Terms —Large Language Model, Ontology, Shared Au-tonomy, Cognitive Architecture 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Operators are essential to Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) missions. However, operators often suffer from low situational awareness [1] and a high workload, which affects safety and can increase the risk of mission-critical errors. While Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) could help alleviate some operator-related issues, full embedded auton-omy remains a distant goal, and humans are still required in an oversight role. In these cases, shared-autonomy frameworks in which operator trust is considered from the outset are crucial to safe and effective operation. Cognitive architectures integrating domain knowledge and reasoning, have been developed in the past as a way to work alongside users in shared-autonomy frameworks. However, existing ontology-based approaches can struggle with repre-senting implicit domain knowledge and performing logical reasoning at a human level [2]. This can limit their use in more complex scenarios [2], [3], which suggests that ontologies alone may struggle to properly handle the dynamic marine environment as well as the challenges that may arise during an operation. 

> 1

School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK 

> 2

School of Engineering and Physical Sciences, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, UK Niamh Ellis is the corresponding author. e-mail: nmfe2000@hw.ac.uk. 

Fig. 1. Diagram of the proposed Cognitive Framework showing communi-cation between different components 

More recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have ap-peared as a method capable of logical reasoning, making them able to understand complex problems and scenarios [2]. However, they can struggle with a deep understanding of the operating domain [4] and are prone to hallucinations [3], [5]. We theorise that using the two together will allow decisions to be grounded in the relevant domain knowledge, but also benefit from the reasoning capabilities of the LLM. In this work, we present a cognitive architecture (Fig. 1) utilising agentic LLMs and an ontology as building blocks, incorporating domain-specific knowledge and the reasoning capabilities of an LLM. We theorise that using the LLMs and an ontology together will allow decisions to be grounded in the relevant domain knowledge, but also benefit from the reasoning capabilities of the LLM. Our proposed framework utilises multiple LLMs, each grounded in domain information from the ontology, to perform complex tasks. The complex task is broken down into a series of simple tasks for individual LLMs, each grounded with ontology information, the overall effect being reduced hallucinations. The complete system aims to aid the operator at multiple stages of the mission, from initial planning to execution and dealing with unexpected situations. We validate our framework using Stonefish [6] on an inspection mission with a simulated underwater vehicle. Results show that when using GPT-OSS [7], we achieve 100% mission evaluation accuracy in different vehicle configurations. Additionally, we obtain 100% valid plans with GPT-OSS for a simple inspection mission. Finally, we accomplish 100% accurate mission execution in Stonefish with GPT-OSS. Our contributions are as follows:  

> •

A cognitive architecture, combining multiple role-specific arXiv:2608.29347v1 [cs.RO] 29 Aug 2026 LLMs with an ontology for grounding, to support shared autonomy at mission evaluation, planning and execution.  

> •

An evaluation of three LLMs (Llama3 [8], GPT-OSS and Qwen2.5 [9]) for each role within the framework, identifying which models are best suited to mission evaluation, planning, and execution, respectively. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Knowledge representations 

Ontologies have been used for storing domain knowledge in marine autonomous systems. In [10], an ontology is used to allow different vehicles in a network to collect and share infor-mation. Unlike the work described in this paper, the system in [10] does not utilise an LLM for its enhanced reasoning capabilities or for natural language communication with the user. In [11], the authors expanded the ontology by adding SWRL rules, which gives the ontology increased reasoning capabilities (in the form of “if-else-then” like statements) on top of the asserted knowledge. However, in [11], the focus is on their insertion and development of a rule-based reasoner and the usability of the SWRL rules for reasoning without any logical reasoning from an LLM. An ontology for use in fault recovery in the marine domain using deterministic and probabilistic information is developed in [12]. The stored deterministic information concerns relationships such as those between goals, tasks, capabilities, and components. While the probabilistic information focuses on the probability of faults, failures and potential fixes in the mission. A cognitive architecture is proposed in [13], which is developed by com-bining multiple existing frameworks such as KnowRob and RoboSherlock. KnowRob is used as the knowledge service for the cognitive architecture. In order for KnowRob to be used in the marine domain, its ontologies must be extended. In our work, we interface our ontology with an LLM to allow additional natural language processing, in more than just goal-oriented tasks. We also allow the LLM to call actions in the environment by storing them in our ontology. While these knowledge representation-based approaches showcase the importance of domain knowledge, they lack log-ical reasoning. This form of reasoning, employed by humans, is likely essential in dynamic missions and is addressed by recent work with LLMs. 

B. Large Language Models 

In recent years, LLMs have been used in many robotics domains. In [14], a two LLM agent approach is used in diagnostics. The two LLMs are employed alongside a Vector database and a digital twin to aid operators in diagnosing causes of unexpected UUV behaviour. This system focuses on determining how to fix unexpected behaviour, unlike the framework proposed here, which first aims to determine if the UUV is capable of performing the mission and then to generate a plan and replan in the face of unexpected behaviour. This will give the user enhanced decision support in a shared-autonomy approach. An LLM is used in [15] for planning in the marine domain. An AUV is controlled based on natural language commands, while a vision-language model (VLM) converts images into text, which can be used to ground the LLM planner. Relevant domain knowledge is also provided in an XML file. Both this work and our work use relevant domain knowledge to ground the LLM. An LLM is used alongside ROS in the control of a robot via natural language commands in [16]. Natural language commands are used to allow users of different levels of experience to interact with and control robots. A Reasoning and Acting (ReAct) agent is implemented, which can understand these natural language commands and execute them on the robot. A part of our system performs similar behaviour with an LLM controlling the behaviour of a UUV in simulation. However, in our work, the LLM calls ROS 2 services and actions for implementing behaviour, which will allow us to monitor the progress of and cancel robot behaviours if necessary. However, LLMs alone are insufficient for many areas, including safety-critical marine operations. This has motivated research into combining them with structured knowledge representations. 

C. Large Language Models and Knowledge Representations 

Work [17] has used an LLM alongside a knowledge graph in a few-shot learning approach. The focus of this work is on safety in terms of interpreting and executing human natural language commands without violating safety considerations. Incorporating a safety mechanism is very important; however, the work in [17] does not model capabilities or consider how they might be affected during an operation and how this might affect the outcome of said operation. An LLM and Knowledge graph system is developed in [18] for a robotic agent working in a kitchen environment. In this work, the LLM is used to suggest a sequence of sub-tasks that can be used to perform a previously unseen task. The resulting set of sub-tasks may have some incorrect steps or make assumptions about objects and actions that the agent has. Therefore, a knowledge graph can be used to update the sequence of sub-tasks with domain-specific knowledge. This is similar to the planning component of our system; however, we preemptively ground the LLM with specific actions that our vehicle can perform. ConceptBot [5] is another framework utilising an LLM and a Knowledge graph in robotics. It is a modular robotics framework for generating achievable and safe plans in spite of natural language inputs containing ambiguity. The operating domain ConceptBot is used in is very different from the marine domain; additionally, there are gaps in the framework’s knowledge graph in some domains, suggesting it would be unsuitable in our scenario. A knowledge graph and LLM-based system is developed in [19]. This work looks at both multi-agent and shared autonomy and utilises behaviour trees for mission execution. Unlike the work in this paper, our work utilises multiple LLMs in simple roles in an effort to reduce hallucinations. In [20], a cognitive framework is presented using multiple LLMs and a vector database to store knowledge. Our work also utilises multiple LLMs; however, we focus on an end-to-end system for an operation instead of just the execution stage. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

The designed system architecture (shown in Fig. 1) is composed of: i) an ontology, ii) a set of agentic LLMs, iii) an LLM supervisor. The LLM agents work collaboratively to evaluate, plan and execute the mission, while the ontology provides grounding to the LLMs. Furthermore, we use ROS to channel the communication between the separate LLM agents, providing additional grounding. Below, we describe each element in more detail. 

A. Ontology 

The ontology provides domain-relevant knowledge to the LLM agents, ensuring their responses are grounded in this information. Our ontology is specifically designed to store information relevant to the different components of our frame-work: i) mission evaluation, ii) mission planning, and iii) mission execution. In terms of mission evaluation , we want our framework to determine if a given UUV is capable of performing a given user-input mission. Hence, within our ontology to aid the LLMs, we store information relating to vehicle components and possible missions. An instance of an underwater vehicle can then be created to represent the specific vehicle being considered for the mission. This instance can then be related to all hardware, software and capabilities that it has using different relationships. Each mission type that a vehicle could be asked to perform, along with a brief description, is also represented in the ontology. These missions are also related to their required capabilities, for example, navigation. We make this decision for two reasons: first, to ground the system’s response when determining whether the UUV can perform the given mis-sion. Secondly, capabilities are considered vehicle independent (i.e. a vehicle can have different configurations of hardware, software and capabilities to have a given capability). We then utilise SWRL rules in the ontology to attribute a given capability to a vehicle for a specific component make-up. An example SWRL rule is given below: Platform (? c) ∧ hasCapability (? c, Localisation ) ∧

PathPlanningAlgorithm (? d) → hasCapability (? c, PathPlanning )

(1) This denotes that an instance of the platform class has the ca-pability of path planning if it has the capability of localisation (itself inferred from another SWRL rule) and a path planning algorithm on board. When the mission evaluation LLM queries the ontology for a user-defined mission, it retrieves both the required capabilities for that mission type and the inferred capabilities of the vehicle, allowing a grounded feasibility assessment without relying on the LLM to reason about hardware or software directly. Regarding mission planning , we want the LLM to select actions that a vehicle can perform and that are also relevant to the mission description. Therefore, we store actions that are a part of our mission types and their pre and post-conditions to aid the LLM in generating a valid plan for  

> Fig. 2. Snapshot of ontology showing connections between mission types and actions along with examples

a given mission. This allows us to relate our actions to relevant software for implementing them with our vehicle. Additionally, we want the LLM to take into consideration any constraints posed by the vehicle or the environment on the plan. Consequently, we also store constraints relating to hardware, for instance, the maximum operating distance of a manipulator and also relevant environmental information, such as locations of permanent structures like wind turbines. We do this in an effort to ensure the plan is relevant to the vehicle and environment, for instance, directing the vehicle to a wind turbine or pipeline to begin an inspection or to a specific location at the end of a mission. Concerning mission execution , we want the LLM to have information about the specific software that can be used to perform mission actions. For this, we store ROS actions and their request parameters within the ontology; we denote some of these parameters as being provided by the LLM and some by the ontology. Parameters that are to be provided by the LLM are more mission-dependent; for instance, the LLM may need to adjust the standoff distance when inspecting a structure due to the environmental conditions. Parameters from the ontology, on the other hand, are static for the given mission, for example, the location of a structure to be inspected. Fig. 2 shows a snapshot of our ontology focused on the planning structure. Different colours of lines denote different types of relationships in the ontology; blue lines denote sub-class relationships, while purple lines denote that an instance is a member of a specific class. The dashed lines denote different relationships possible between instances of the class. These are used to denote which actions are a part of a given mission and specific software that can be used to implement actions. 

B. LLM Agents 

Individual LLM agents are split into different roles, de-livering simple tasks that, when combined, enable them to handle complex queries from the user. Each LLM within our framework is hosted locally via Ollama [21]. 

Role 1: Mission Evaluation , the first role of the agentic LLMs, is in determining if the UUV is capable of performing a given mission. Two LLMs are used in this, as shown in the mission evaluation box in Fig. 1, the first of which is responsi-ble for determining the types of missions in the user’s mission description. We prompt the LLM with a system prompt containing the possible mission types from the ontology and the user’s mission description and ask it to select the most relevant mission type(s). We use ROS to communicate these types to a second LLM node, which determines if the UUV can perform the mission. This LLM has a system prompt with information from the ontology concerning vehicle capabilities and required capabilities for the mission types. We instruct the LLM via this prompt to perform a multi-step process to determine mission possibility by comparing requirements with the vehicle’s capabilities. The mission evaluation component can return 3 different results. These are fully possible, partially possible and impossible. For a mission to be fully possible, the given UUV instance, described in the ontology, must have all the required capabilities for a given mission. A partially possible mission corresponds to when the given UUV instance has the required capabilities for one or more parts of a multi-part mission, for example, for an inspection but not for anode testing. Finally, for a mission to be impossible, the given UUV instance must be missing the required capabilities for all parts of a mission 

Role 2: Mission Planning , the second role the agentic LLMs perform is plan generation. For this, one LLM is used, which generates a plan collaboratively with the user. Information about actions, pre-conditions, and post-conditions of the identified mission types is fed into the LLM via its system prompt. After an initial plan has been generated, the user can ask the framework to improve on the plan before moving to the next stage. For example, a user may ask for additional steps to be added or for a specific part of a step to be revised or removed. Each subsequent plan can be additionally edited as required. The final plan can then be fed into the mission execution component so that the mission can be executed by the vehicle. 

Roles 3 & 4: Mission Execution and diagnostics , The final two roles of the framework, execution and diagnostics, are performed largely in parallel. In the execution stage, an agentic LLM utilises a tool-based architecture to call actions within the environment. Here, the ontology is used to give information on how to invoke the required functionalities to deliver the mission. The operator is interfaced with this part of the framework in real time, allowing them to approve or edit tool calls as needed. Each tool call utilises a ROS action or service to fulfil the behaviour. This allows us to use tested implementations for behaviours instead of relying on the LLM to generate implementations of a given behaviour. We use ROS services to implement short-lived behaviours, such as planning a coverage path around a structure, and ROS actions for longer-lasting behaviours, such as path following, where we may require feedback or wish to cancel the action. In the case of unexpected events, such as a piece of hardware failing, another LLM (LLM Diagnostics) is capable of detecting and analysing the fault. The LLM Diagnostics takes in information from the ontology and web searches to aid in its diagnosis. Through collaboration with the user, this component can suggest fixes or mitigations, including replanning the mission if necessary. Being able to cancel in-progress actions will be very beneficial for the mission diagnostics component. IV. R ESULTS 

We test our framework in Stonefish [6] for an inspection scenario using a model of an ROV developed in our lab. The robot utilises ROS for communication, and is fitted with a stereo camera, a sonar, and an underwater manipulator, making it suited for an inspection in good environmental conditions. We evaluated the mission evaluation, mission planning, and mission execution components with the three different LLMs: i) Llama3, ii) Qwen2.5, and iii) GPT-OSS, and for different scenarios. All experiments were run on a ZBook Studio G10 with an i7-13700H processor and an RTX 4070 8GB graphics card. 

A. Mission Evaluation Results 

We evaluate the Mission evaluation module of our architec-ture. We instatiate three versions of our vehicle. The first has all the required capabilities for an inspection and an anode testing mission, including the manipulation and 3D stereo mapping. The second vehicle is missing essential capabilities for anode testing purposes, i.e., there is no manipulator on-board. However, it has all the requirements for an inspection mission. The third and final configuration is missing the required capabilities for both inspection and anode testing missions.                           

> TABLE I TABLE OF MISSION EVALUATION RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT CONFIGURATIONS AND DIFFERENT LLM S.
> Configuration Metric Llama3 Qwen2.5 GPT-OSS
> Fully Correct Feasibility 60% 20% 100%
> w/o requirements 100% 60% 100% Partially Correct Feasibility 80% 20% 100%
> w/o requirements 40% 0% 40% Impossible Correct Feasibility 100% 100% 100%
> w/o requirements 100% 100% 100%

The following mission description, “ An inspection of a structure to generate a 3D map and identify anodes which can then be tested ,” is used for this test to ensure we can obtain all three possible results. We run each setup 5 times for each of the LLMs with the mission requirements from the ontology. To prove the value of the information in the ontology, we then run it a further 5 times, for each LLM, without the mission requirements from the ontology. The obtained results are shown in Table I. As can be seen from the Table, Qwen2.5 struggles to correctly identify fully or partially possible configurations, suggesting it is not suitable for this role. While Llama3 obtains better results, it still struggles LLM Correct Types ID                         

> Llama3 87% Qwen2.5 100%
> GPT-OSS 87% TABLE II TABLE OF MISSION TYPES RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT LLM S.
> LLM Mission Type Pre-conditions met Successful completion Optimal Plan
> Llama3 Anode test 20% 0% 0% Inspection 100% 100% 0% Qwen2.5 Anode test 0% 0% 20% Inspection 100% 80% 0% GPT-OSS Anode test 40% 40% 80% Inspection 100% 100% 60%
> TABLE III TABLE OF MISSION PLANNING RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT MISSIONS .

to correctly identify the same configurations. Without the requirements from the ontology, we found that the LLMs often did well in the fully possible and impossible configurations but struggled in the partially possible configuration. In this configuration, each LLM can be overconfident and determine that the mission is fully possible, even though the vehicle is missing essential hardware, in this case, a manipulator. Furthermore, in cases when, without the required capabilities, the LLM correctly identifies that the given UUV can perform only part of the mission, it incorrectly identifies the missing component. This validates our use of an ontology to ground LLMs. We also evaluate the same LLMs for the role of identifying mission types in our framework; for this, the same mission description is fed in, and Table II is produced. This is an important part of our framework, as can be seen from the results in Table I, where the three LLMs can be overconfident in assigning Fully capable to a UUV that is only partially capable. 

B. Mission Planning Results 

In this section, we are evaluating the planning component of the framework. Here we are evaluating whether our framework is capable of developing valid plans. In this, we evaluate the following criteria:  

> •

Each step has its preconditions met by the step or steps before it, where necessary  

> •

The final plan would successfully complete the mission objectives  

> •

If the plan includes any redundant or contradictory steps We test this component using two different mission descrip-tions. The first of which is the same description used in the mission evaluation results. The second mission description is for a simpler mission, containing only one stage, and is “ An inspection of a structure to generate a 3D map. ”We run 5 tests for each mission description. The results for the two mission descriptions are shown in Table III. It can be seen from this table that overall GPT-OSS gets the strongest results in Anode testing missions, being the only LLM that  

> Fig. 3. The ROV performing the inspection manuever in a wind turbine in Stonefish simulation environment.

produces plans that would successfully complete the anode inspection. Overall, however, the results for this mission type suggest that additional work is needed on this component of our framework. In terms of the inspection mission, GPT-OSS performs the best overall, getting 100% in both meeting pre-conditions and successful completion of the mission. While Llama3 gets comparative results in these metrics, it does generate multiple plans with redundant steps. 

C. Mission Execution Results 

We also evaluate a “perfect” mission with no faults during execution in Stonefish for an inspection mission. The vehicle and wind turbine being inspected are shown in Fig 3. In this case, we use one plan generated by GPT-OSS, with no redundant or contradictory steps, for the mission description, “An inspection of a structure to generate a 3D map ”. The following steps are in the plan: 1) Initialise slam 2) Generate Coverage Path plan 3) Follow Path 4) Move to a position near the surface For this scenario, we develop ROS actions and services using existing methods to implement the required behaviour. These behaviours are:  

> •

Move to a 6 degree of freedom (DOF) position  

> •

SLAM for generating a map of the structure  

> •

Generation of a coverage path plan for the structure  

> •

Path following of a generated path We evaluate the following criteria in terms of execution:  

> •

Number of actions called  

> •

Number of incorrect actions called (i.e. action called at the wrong time)  

> •

Number of times human correction is required (i.e. num-ber of actions with the wrong name or wrong or missing parameters or called at the wrong time) While we attempted testing on all three LLMs as in the previous tests, we have omitted the Llama3 results for our paper, as this LLM consistently struggled to execute the mission. While attempting these tests, Llama3 often gener-ated incorrectly formatted output, making parsing for action LLM Actions called Incorrect Actions Times human feedback required 

Qwen2.5 7.4 2.4 3.4 GPT-OSS 4 0 0

TABLE IV TABLE OF MISSION PLANNING RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT MISSIONS .NUMBERS SHOW AVERAGE VALUES .

calls impossible, or frequently generated incorrect action calls despite repeated human feedback. This highlights that Llama3 is unsuited to this role in our framework. For Qwen2.5 and GPT-OSS models, Table IV has been produced. As has been seen from Tables I, III and IV, GPT-OSS performs best in the roles of mission evaluation, planning and execution. We theorise that this is due to the model being a reasoning or thinking model. On the other hand, Qwen2.5 per-forms best in the mission types identification role; we theorise that this is due to GPT-OSS over-reasoning about the wording of the user’s mission description. And therefore, determining that the mission encompasses an inspection mission where anodes are identified but not specifically tested. V. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In conclusion, our framework is possible of evaluating a vehicle for a given mission, generating a simple plan for said mission and executing it under perfect conditions. We have identified which of the three tested LLMs is best suited to each role within our framework. For identifying mission types within a user input, we have identified Qwen2.5 as the best suited. When it comes to classifying a vehicle’s ability to complete a given mission, we have identified GPT-OSS as best suited. Regarding planning, GPT-OSS performs best and also performs best in mission execution. Our future work will focus on real-world testing of our framework and further development of components, particu-larly the diagnostics component. Developing our diagnostics part will allow our framework to work for more complex scenarios, adapting in the event of failure. This allows us to test our system more thoroughly and determine its true value in unforeseen circumstances when compared with more traditional methods. Real-world testing will allow us to further prove and validate our approach by exposing it to more challenging conditions. Further, it would allow us to model a range of potential faults that could be encountered during a mission. REFERENCES [1] G. Ho, N. Pavlovic, and R. Arrabito, “Human Factors Issues with Operating Unmanned Underwater Vehicles,” Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting , vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 429–433, Sep. 2011, publisher: SAGE Publications Inc. [2] J. Zhou, X. Su, W. Fu, Y. Lv, and B. Liu, “Enhancing intention prediction and interpretability in service robots with LLM and KG,” Scientific Reports , vol. 14, no. 26999, 2024. [3] Y. Qi, G. Kyebambo, S. Xie, W. Shen, S. Wang, B. Xie, B. He, Z. Wang, and S. Jiang, “Safety Control of Service Robots with LLMs and Embodied Knowledge Graphs,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.17846 [4] Q. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Bei, Z. Yuan, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, H. Chen, Y. Xiao, C. Zhou, J. Dong, Y. Chang, and X. Huang, “A survey of graph retrieval-augmented generation for customized large language models,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.13958 [5] A. Leanza, A. Moroncelli, G. Vizzari, F. Braghin, L. Roveda, and B. Spahiu, “Conceptbot: Enhancing robot’s autonomy through task decomposition with large language models and knowledge graph,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.00570 [6] M. Grimaldi, P. Cie´ slak, E. Ochoa, V. Bharti, H. Rajani, I. Carlucho, M. Koskinopoulou, Y. R. Petillot, and N. Gracias, “Stonefish: Supporting machine learning research in marine robotics,” in 2025 IEEE Interna-tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2025, pp. 1–7. [7] OpenAI, “gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.10925 [8] Llama Team AI @ Meta, “The llama 3 herd of models,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.21783 [9] Qwen, “Qwen2.5 technical report,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.15115 [10] X. Li, S. Bilbao, T. Mart´ ın-Wanton, J. Bastos, and J. Rodriguez, “SWARMs ontology: A common information model for the cooperation of underwater robots,” Sensors , vol. 17, no. 3, 2017. [11] Z. Zhai, J.-F. Mart´ ınez Ortega, N. Lucas Mart´ ınez, and P. Castillejo, “A Rule-Based Reasoner for Underwater Robots Using OWL and SWRL,” 

Sensors , vol. 18, no. 10, 2018. [12] J. Coffelt, M. Mohammadi Kashani, A. Wasowski, and P. Kampmann, “Belief-based fault recovery for marine robotics,” in The Eighth Joint Ontology Workshops (JOWO’22) , 08 2022. [13] J. P. Coffelt, M. Beetz, and P. Kampmann, “Towards a cognitive architecture for marine robots,” in OCEANS 2023 - Limerick , 2023, pp. 1–8. [14] M. Buchholz, N. Ellis, R. A. Hara, I. Carlucho, and Y. R. Petillot, “A collaborative reasoning framework for anomaly diagnostics in underwater robotics,” 2025, IROS 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.03075 [15] R. Yang, F. Zhang, and M. Hou, “Oceanplan: Hierarchical planning and replanning for natural language auv piloting in large-scale unexplored ocean environments,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.15369 [16] R. Royce, M. Kaufmann, J. Becktor, S. Moon, K. Carpenter, K. Pak, A. Towler, R. Thakker, and S. Khattak, “Enabling novel mission oper-ations and interactions with ROSA: The robot operating system agent,” in 2025 IEEE Aerospace Conference , 2025, pp. 1–16. [17] A. Althobaiti, A. Ayala, J. Gao, A. Almutairi, M. Deghat, I. Razzak, and F. Cruz, “How Can LLMs and Knowledge Graphs Contribute to Robot Safety? A Few-Shot Learning Approach,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11387 [18] S. Singh, K. Swaminathan, N. Dash, R. Singh, S. Banerjee, M. Srid-haran, and M. Krishna, “AdaptBot: Combining LLM with Knowledge Graphs and Human Input for Generic-to-Specific Task Decomposition and Knowledge Refinement,” 2025, accepted to IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 2025. [19] M. Grimaldi, C. Cernicchiaro, S. R. Rua, A. El-Masri-El-Chaarani, M. Buchholz, L. Michael, P. R. Rodriguez, I. Carlucho, and Y. R. Petillot, “Advancing Shared and Multi-Agent Autonomy in Underwater Missions: Integrating Knowledge Graphs and Retrieval-Augmented Generation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.20370 [20] M. Buchholz, I. Carlucho, M. Grimaldi, and Y. R. Petillot, “Distributed ai agents for cognitive underwater robot autonomy,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.23735 [21] Ollama, “Ollama,” accessed: 03/07/2026. [Online]. Available: https://ollama.com/