Title: 2607.28005v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.28005v1

Published Time: Fri, 31 Jul 2026 00:52:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
1

# Paper Manuscript 

# Title 

Deep learning-based hierarchical insect classification using camera trap imagery 

# Authors 

Zaki Mahfoud  a, Juan A. Chiavassa  b, Simon Walther  c, Florian Haselbeck  a,

Ehsan Yaghoubi  a

# Affiliations  

> a

Weihenstephan-Triesdorf University of Applied Sciences, Department of Sustainable 

Agriculture and Energy Systems, Professorship of Smart Farming,  Am Staudengarten 1 ,

85354 Freising, Germany  

> b

We ihenstephan-Triesdorf University of Applied Sciences,  Institute for Biomass Research ,

Neuseser Str. 1, 91732 Merkendorf, Germany  

> c

Weihenstephan-Triesdorf University of Applied Sciences, Department of Sustainable 

Agriculture and Energy Systems, Professorship of Digital Farm Management, Am 

Staudengarten 1, 85354 Freising, Germany 

# Corresponding author 

Ehsan Yaghoubi  a,

ehsan.yaghoubi@hswt.de 

# Keywords 

hierarchical classification, deep learning, computer vision, insects, biodiversity monitoring. 

# Highlights 

- manually-curated and pre-processed insect camera trap monitoring dataset from 

Germany. 

- Deep learning-based hierarchical image classification leveraging biological taxonomy. 

- Hierarchy maximises use of partially-labelled data, minimises unclassified samples. 

- Strong performance on many rare classes due to class-balanced weighting. 

- Limitations remain for low-sample, visually heterogeneous classes of small specimens. 2

# Abstract 

Declining insect populations make reliable biodiversity monitoring increasingly urgent, yet 

monitoring of insect biodiversity is hampered by a lack of standardised data and by costly 

and time-consuming manual identification by expert entomologists.  Deep learning-based 

image classif iers, processing data from automated non-lethal camera traps, have the 

potential to transform an d scale insect biodiversity monitoring. However, challenges 

remain in acquiring expert-annotated datasets, developing model architectures that 

generalise well across diverse taxonomic levels  and training models on highly imbalanced 

data. Hierarchical data also benefits from designing models that default to higher-

confidence, coarser-level predictions, when uncertain about finer taxonomic levels.  In this 

paper we  address these challenges with a deep learning-based hierarchical classification 

model.  First, we present an manually-curated, long-tailed dataset of around one million 

images of insects, extracted from 1,801 camera-trap video recordings and annotated with a 

five-level, 34-class hierarchy. Further, we adapt a hierarchical classification model 

architecture  to a five-level variable-depth hierarchy,  with class-balanced weighting . Our 

model improves on non-hierarchical classifiers by leveraging biological taxonomy to 

extract granularity-specific visual features and makes hierarchy-consistent predictions to 

the deepest taxonomic level that meets a confidence threshold ( T =  0.6 ). Our model 

achieved a per-level accuracy of 80-99% on test data, across five levels of hierarchy. 

Furthermore, our results show the model's ability to correctly classify (i) the parent class of 

wrongly predicted instances, (ii) rare classes in our highly imbalanced dataset, and (iii) 

visually similar, but taxonomically distinct, insects. Despite its limitations on very low-

resolution images, our approach is a promising application of deep learning-based 

hierarchical classifiers to imbalanced datasets for biodiversity monitoring. 3

# 1 Introduction 

Insects are a highly diverse class of animals that are of vital importance for both 

ecosystem-services and agriculture, as pollinators and natural pest controllers (Dainese et 

al., 2019; Ollerton, 2017), while also being agricultural pests of significant economic 

importance (Zalucki et al., 2012).  Over the past several decades, a rthropod populations 

have been reported to be in decline (Hallmann et al., 2017; Wagner et al., 2021), although 

population changes are not uniformly negative and vary both regionally and between taxa 

(Engelhardt et al., 2022; Van Klink et al., 2024). Changes in insect populations have 

implications not only for their diversity, abundance and biomass, but also for their function 

in ecosystems and their ability to adapt to future environmental change (Wildermuth et al., 

2025). In this context, reliable and at-scale monitoring of insects is important to understand 

how their distributions are changing both spatially and temporally (Wagner et al., 2021). 

Despite this concerning trend, the monitoring of arthropod populations is hampered by a 

lack of (temporally and spatially) standardised data (Engelhardt et al., 2022) and of 

entomologists to carry out surveys (European Commission. Directorate General for 

Environment., 2022). Monitoring of insects is typically performed manually, which is time 

consuming and requires expert entomologists to identify species (Montgomery et al., 

2021). Methods such as DNA Barcoding are often necessary to conclusively identify 

species with high intraspecific and low interspecific variation, but these are destructive and 

cannot provide information on the abundance of particular species (Høye et al., 2021). 

Recent advances in deep learning (DL) methods have demonstrated their potential to 

transform biodiversity monitoring, providing a low-cost and scalable means of tracking 

changes in insect populations and diversity (van Klink et al., 2022). DL methods can be 

applied both to individual non-lethal monitoring devices and as part of a network of 

monitoring devices, providing real-time spatio-temporal data on biodiversity changes 

(Høye et al., 2021). DL-based image classifiers, e.g. convolutional neural networks 

(CNNs), trained on labelled images have been successfully employed for the monitoring of 

arthropods using automated camera traps (Bjerge et al., 2022; Sittinger et al., 2024; Tian et 

al., 2023). However, when considering the  taxonomic diversity  of insects, it is challenging 

to build a well-generalizing model without addressing the relationships between classes 1

and the granularity of labels (Chang et al., 2021; Deng et al., 2014). To generalise to many 

classes, a model must differentiate between classes that are mutually exclusive (e.g. a 

weevil cannot also be a grasshopper) and those that are not (a weevil is also a member of 

Insecta  and  Coleoptera ). Hierarchical  classification,  where image labels can be structured 

according to a given hierarchy, for example, biol ogical taxonomy for insects,  addresses 

these challenges by encoding a semantic relationship between classes (Deng et al., 2014).  

> 1

The term ‘class’ is used in this paper as a general term for a labelled grouping of 

specimens at any taxonomic level, in addition to the taxonomic ‘class’  Insecta  or 

Arachnida , used additionally in this paper. 4

It improves on flat classifiers by leveraging the hierarchical nature of biological taxonomy 

to extract level-specific visual features for coarse and fine classes (Chang et al., 2021; 

Elhamod et al., 2022). The effectiveness of hierarchical classifier models to share extracted 

features between levels and achieve high classification accuracy has been demonstrated on 

balanced datasets (equal numbers of images per class) of limited hierarchy depth (Chang et 

al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022). With respect to practical application, hierarchical 

classification provides the advantage of classifying at coarser levels of the taxonomy if a 

specific insect cannot be predicted with high enough confidence, e.g., since it was not 

included in the training data. 

Training on real-world biological datasets, however, presents particular challenges, with 

highly imbalanced numbers of samples per class, low numbers of samples for minority 

classes and incomplete labelling to species level (Schneider et al., 2020). Developing DL-

based models typically requires large datasets of labelled images to achieve acceptable 

performance, but acquiring and curating labelled datasets is costly and time-consuming 

(Høye et al., 2021). Camera traps themselves produce large amounts of data that can be 

used for training insect image classifiers (Bjerge et al., 2023a; Sittinger et al., 2024), but 

even in these cases challenges remain with  obtaining  adequate images for rare classes. The 

application of automated image classifiers in insect camera traps faces additional 

challenges at inference: Unlike a human taking a photograph of an insect to upload to an 

online platform for identification, an automated monitoring device cannot manoeuvre into 

an optimal position to view the specimen. It also does not know  a priori  which frame of a 

video feed will give the most confident and accurate classification. Here hierarchical 

classification has been demonstrated as a method to minimise uncertain predictions by 

classifying to the finest taxonomic level of the hierarchy that meets a threshold of 

confidence (Wu et al., 2020) and to tag species not seen during training (Bjerge et al., 

2023b). 

Despite this progress, a critical gap persists: existing hierarchical classification models 

require significant adaptations to work with variable-depth hierarchies, imbalanced 

datasets and images suffering from occlusions, suboptimal poses and varying lighting 

conditions. A model that can be easily adapted to a given hierarchy, be used with 

imbalanced and partially labelled data and suboptimal images would be very useful in the 

field. In this paper, we address this gap by proposing a DL-based computer vision model, 

employing a hierarchical classification approach, that addresses these challenges. First, we 

present a new manually-curated, long-tailed dataset of images of insects with around one 

million samples, extracted from 1,801 camera-trap video recordings , annotated with a five-

level, 34-class taxonomic hierarchy and made available to the community to support future 

research.  Second, we design a model architecture that makes hierarchy-aware predictions 

to the deepest taxonomic level that meets a user-defined confidence threshold in a variable-

depth hierarchy.  Third, we evaluate the model's performance systematically across all 

hierarchy levels and classes, including analysis of rare-class performance, visually 

confusable taxa, and the effect of the confidence threshold on prediction depth.  The 5

remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 reviews related work; Section 3 

describes the dataset and model; Section 4 presents and discusses results; and Section 5 

concludes. 

# 2 Related work 

In this section we review existing methods that leverage DL-based approaches for insect 

biodiversity monitoring, as well as works on hierarchical classification. In the course of 

this review we also consider the datasets used, in particular their acquisition, structure and 

imbalance. 

## 2.1  Insect biodiversity monitoring 

The use of DL-based computer vision models for field-based detection and classification of 

insects has been demonstrated by a number of studies  (Bjerge et al., 2022; Sittinger et al., 

2024; Stark et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2023) . These systems vary in their taxonomic scope, 

dataset characteristics and classification architecture, with implications for their ability to 

generalise across taxa and deployment conditions. Examples of camera traps used in three 

of these papers are illustrated in  Figure 1 .

A straightforward implementation of these systems are automated agricultural pest traps. 

Typically targetting a limited number of species, they avoid both the need for hierarchical 

architectures and the challenge of class imbalance  (Preti et al., 2021; Tian et al., 2023) . For 

multi-class classifiers, insufficient labelled data for training, in particular for rare classes, 

Figure  1: Automated camera traps used for detecting and classifying insects. (a) Camera 

with platform from Sittinger et al., 2024; (b) Camera monitoring Sedum on a roof from 

Bjerge et al. 2023a; (c) 3D-printed camera trap attached to a Malaise trap net from 

Chiavassa et al. 2024. 6

as well as imbalanced datasets and image resolution for very small insects present 

challenges  (Schneider et al., 2020; Teixeira et al., 2023) . Schneider et al. (2020) found poor 

recall scores for classes trained on less than 500 images.  The question of dealing with long-

tailed species distributions during model training is compounded by the hierarchy: rare 

monotypic taxa remain under-represented at each level of the hierarchy.  Cui et al. (2019) 

proposed a re-weighting method to correct for class imbalance during model training. 

Sittinger et al. (2024) developed a camera trap ( Figure 1 , (a)) incorporating on-device 

detection and tracking and subsequent classification with a 27-class model.  Even with 

relatively few classes, their flat architecture has an inherent limitation: treating parent and 

sub-classes as mutually exclusive, which we address in this paper. They used a model 

trained on a hand-curated dataset to automate the classification and creation of a much 

larger dataset from camera recordings. This  reduces the annotation bottleneck and  is 

directly relevant to the dataset construction approach adopted in this paper.  Bjerge et al .

(2023a) employed a similar process of training a classifier on a small, curated dataset and 

then using it to create a larger labelled dataset from time-lapse camera images using their 

camera trap  (Figure 1 , (b)). Their three-level (order, family, species) hierarchical insect 

classification model achieved high accuracy at all levels. While many studies use data 

labelled to species level, Stark et al. (2023) presented an eight-class model of arthropod 

orders to classify images of pollinators on flowers, demonstrating accurate predictions on 

coarse-grained classes that nevertheless provide useful data for biodiversity monitoring. Of 

particular relevance to the research in our paper is the Field Automatic Insect Recognition-

Device (FAIR-Device), which uses a camera trap attached to a Malaise trap net ( Figure 1 ,

(c)) to detect and video-record insects passing through the device. This presents a non-

lethal means of collecting close-up images of insects in the field for biodiversity 

monitoring  (Chiavassa et al., 2024) . Its use in a number of locations in 2021 and 2023 has 

created a dataset of over 2,500 videos of insects,  from which the manually-curated dataset 

described in Section  3.1  was extracted. 

## 2.2  Hierarchical classification 

Semantically, hierarchical classification seeks to capture the relationships between class 

labels, to encode both mutually-exclusive and nested classes  (Deng et al., 2014) . In 

biological taxonomy, where relationships between classes are, to an extent, based on 

shared morphological features, the features of coarser taxa (e.g. class, order) can also 

inform the identification of finer taxa (e.g. family, genus, species) (Elhamod et al., 2022). 

Labelling images for training to species level requires sufficient domain knowledge, image 

resolution and visibility of distinguishing features  (Chang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; 

Wu et al., 2020) . Hierarchical classifiers enable the use of images labelled at more than one 

taxonomic level in DL-based models. Hierarchical classification can also exploit the 

degree of relatedness between classes so that, even when a prediction is incorrect, it 

remains taxonomically close to the true label  (Bertinetto et al., 2019) . This requires  a

model architecture which encodes the degree of relation between classes, e.g. in the loss 7

function. With this approach, misclassification between more closely related classes (for 

example, two genera in the same family) is less penalised than misclassification between 

distantly related classes. 

Elhamod et al. (2022) presented a two-level (genus-species) hierarchy of fish samples that 

showed higher accuracy, especially for partially occluded images, when compared to a 

non-hierarchical (flat) model. However, the hierarchy is particularly shallow and is not 

enforced in the loss function. From a highly imbalanced raw dataset of museum samples, 

they created balanced subsets for training, validation and testing. Chang et al. (2021) 

proposed using three level-specific classifier heads to separate features by granularity, then 

concatenating the fine-grained features to improve coarse-grained predictions. Their 

implementation of independent cross-entropy loss on each level does not, however, encode 

the degree of relatedness between classes, nor is the effect of class imbalance addressed. 

Chen et al. (2022) expanded on the disentanglement of level-specific features presented in 

Chang et al. (2021) by implementing residual connections before the classification heads to 

add features from coarse-level classes (order, family) to fine-level classes (genus, species). 

Their  hierarchical loss function encodes the relationships between taxa and makes 

hierarchy-consistent predictions. Thus, two species can be defined in the loss function as 

mutually-exclusive of one another, while both being in the same genus. Additionally, they 

model mixed-depth hierarchies (2- and 3-level) to simulate lack of domain knowledge, 

although the maximum depth is limited to three levels. While the architecture proves to be 

effective as a hierarchical classifier, results are based on a balanced dataset of birds, cars 

and aircraft, and do not address the class imbalance characteristic of real-world 

entomological data. 

When a model can classify at coarser or finer levels, the confidence of its predictions at 

each level becomes an important design consideration. To this end Wu et al. (2020) 

proposed a method for classifying to the deepest class in a hierarchy that meets a threshold 

of confidence. While they propose a top-down approach and their applied confidence 

threshold is unspecified, we implement a bottom-up method, which we test at four 

probability thresholds. Another application of (low) probability thresholds was presented 

by Bjerge et al . (2023b), who implement anomaly detection in hierarchical insect 

classification model to tag novel taxa not seen in training.  Wallin et al. (2025)  proposed 

using probability distributions to predict out-of-distribution samples to the correct internal 

nodes in the hierarchy.  Together, these works demonstrate the value of confidence-aware 

prediction depth as a mechanism for minimising uncertain classifications, which is a 

principle central to the model presented in this paper. 8

# 3 Materials and methods 

In this section we present our dataset, including curation and hierarchical annotation. Then 

we describe our model architecture and loss functions, before detailing the experimental 

setup and consider the performance metrics we used. 

## 3.1  Data 

This section outlines the process of collection of the raw data, the extraction of the images 

used to create the manually-curated dataset as a contribution to this paper and their 

annotation for use in the hierarchical classification model.  Figure 2 illustrates the 

workflow, from data collection, through extraction of cropped images and curation. All 

source code is available at  https://github.com/smAIL-WS/HierarchicalInsectClassification 

and the dataset is available  at 10.5281/zenodo.21690971. 

Figure  2: The workflow comprises data collection (1), extraction of cropped images from 

individual frames of the video recordings (2) and curation of the cropped images (3). A 

sample of the cleaned dataset is presented in (4), showing visually similar Syrphidae (a) 

and Vespidae (b), low resolution samples (Anthicidae) (c) and specimens larger than the 

field-of-view (Orthoptera) (d). 9

3.1.1  Data collection 

Our starting point for this study was the raw video data collected and labelled in an earlier 

study with the so-called FAIR-Device automated camera trap. Further information on the 

trap design, and examples of data collected can be found in Chiavassa et al. (2024). The 

device replaces the typical lethal trap attached to the top of a Malaise-type insect trap and 

employs motion-activated video recording of insects (or other arthropods) passing through 

the apparatus. Video recordings were collected in July-August 2021 and August-September 

2023 at four grassland sites in Lower Saxony, Germany and comprise 2,541 videos ranging 

from several seconds to several hours. The specimens in the videos were identified to 

varying granularity (from order to species level ) using iNaturalist’s 

(https://www.inaturalist.org/) DL-based and community-reviewed identification process. 

We used the raw dataset and annotations from Chiavassa et al. (2024) as the basis for our 

study, before preparing and processing the data, as outlined in the following section. 

3.1.2  Data preparation 

We first limited the source videos to those with a single labelled specimen, excluding 

videos with two or more specimens present ( n = 740) , thereby reducing the dataset to 1,801 

videos. This was done to reduce the instances of the wrong label being applied to the 

cropped images and thus to reduce the need for manual re-classification on this large 

dataset. The cropped still images were extracted from the video recordings using a 

YOLOv8-based object detector, pre-trained on invertebrates 

(https://github.com/jach999/fairtrack/ ). Each frame of the videos was processed to 

maximise the number of cropped images. 

The extracted cropped images were curated to remove unlabelled specimens (including 

instances where two insects were present together) and erroneous crops (e.g. debris, empty 

frames). While some insects remain active while passing through the camera trap, thereby 

presenting very diverse poses that are beneficial for training, other insects remain 

motionless for extended periods which results in repetitive cropped images, despite 

representing only one individual. In the case of the latter the number of repetitive images 

was reduced by expertly curating the dataset to retain every  nth  image (where  n was 

determined per class based on the degree of repetition, ranging fro m 5 to 100 ). 

We created a database including metadata for each sample, consisting of labels, image 

height and width and year of data collection. Images varied substantially in size and aspect 

ratio (see Figure S1 for full distributions by year). This heterogeneity necessitated 

preprocessing transformations (resizing, cropping, padding) to conform to model input 

requirements. 

3.1.3  Hierarchical annotation 

Using the  manually-curated and cleaned dataset, we defined a hierarchy that is suitable for 

DL model training. It takes into account the availability of samples and the visual 

distinctness of classes. First, we defined  the branches of the hierarchy, beginning with the 10 

root nodes  Insecta  and  Arachnida  and adding child nodes of descending taxonomic rank. 

The branches were extended to terminal nodes, the depth of which was dependent on the 

availability and granularity of the labelled data, while respecting the constraints of 

biological taxonomy. Three criteria governed the construction of the hierarchy: (i) 

taxonomic coherence, ensuring that all classes remain within their correct taxonomic 

branches; (ii) data availability, requiring a minimum number of labelled samples for a class 

to be viable for model training; and (iii) visual similarity, requiring that the members of a 

class share enough morphological features to be learnable by a computer vision model. 

Taxonomic coherence was treated as an inviolable constraint, while data availability and 

visual similarity jointly determined the depth to which each branch was resolved. This 

resulted in an asymmetric hierarchy where the depth of terminal nodes varies across 

branches: more abundant and visually distinguishable taxa (such as  Sepsidae  and  Vespidae )

were defined on branches to the taxonomic rank of family, while rarer or visually more 

homogeneous taxa (such as  Or thoptera  and  Mecoptera ) were defined only to the rank of 

order. 

Second, nodes in the hierarchy tree were retained only for classes with uniquely labelled 

images at that node.  This excluded redundant nodes, which would contain the same 

information as their parent or child nodes. An exception to this was for intermediate nodes 

with two or more closely-related child classes at the same level (for example  Coleoptera 

has no unique images but is retained as a parent class of  Anthicidae, Chrysomeloidea, 

Coccinelloidea  and  Curculionoidea ).  This resulted in a dataset with up to five levels of 

hierarchical labels per class. The coarsest level L1 comprises the classes  Insecta  and 

Arachnida . The respective levels of the hierarchy are not strictly associated with a 

taxonomic rank.  The hierarchy is displayed in  Figure 3 .11 

The dataset is highly imbalanced ( see Table S1 for full per-class video and image counts), 

with head classes of hundreds of videos and tail classes of as few as three videos. This is 

typical of real-world datasets where abundance varies greatly between classes and presents 

a particular challenge during training of the classification model. While it is beneficial to 

train on a large dataset to reduce the risk of over-fitting and improve the ability of the 

model to generalise to unseen samples, the imbalance can lead to bias in the model toward 

head classes. Corrections for this bias, which we account for in model development, are 

discussed in the following section. 

## 3.2  Hierarchical insect classification model 

The  model architecture (visualised in  Figure 4 ) is inspired by the method described by 

Chen  et al.  (2022) , with several methodological changes. First, we expanded it to five 

classifier heads (one for each hierarchy level L1-L5), while adapting it to work with the 

variable-depth branches of our dataset.  This ensures compatibility with samples with single 

labels (e.g.  Arachnida , L1) and those with hierarchical labels ( Insecta  and its sub-classes, 

L1-L5). Additionally, we add ed  both class-based and hierarchy-based weighting of the two 

loss functions (tree loss and cross-entropy loss), to account for the imbalance in the dataset. 

Figure  3: Diagram of the hierarchy of the dataset, showing levels L1-L5, where L1 

represents the coarsest level. Hierarchy levels are independent of taxonomic rank. 12 

The model comprises a feature-extractor backbone, passing its output of global features to 

five level-specific blocks each comprising convolutional and fully connected layers which 

feed level-specific classifier heads. As a feature extractor we employed a pre-trained 

ResNet18, as a well-known and commonly used backbone, that works well on different 

tasks and is computationally lightweight. We performed end-to-end training, without 

freezing the backbone. Each level of the hierarchy has its own convolutional refinement 

block applied to the feature map output of the backbone. After pooling and flattening, each 

level in the hierarchy produces level-specific embeddings from its own fully-connected 

layer. The outputs of each level are added to the outputs of each of the finer levels below it, 

passing features from coarser to finer levels. ReLU activation is applied to each of the five 

(summed) outputs before classification with a linear layer at that respective level. Each 

classifier head predicts only among the classes defined at its own hierarchy level. The 

classifier outputs raw logits, to which sigmoid or softmax is applied for use in the tree loss 

and cross-entropy loss, respectively. 

The loss function used to train the model comprises two additive components. The tree loss 

ensures hierarchical consistency and exploits the fine-grained features learned on sub-

classes to influence predictions on their parent classes, while the cross-entropy loss 

Figure  4: Model architecture, incorporating a feature extractor, level-specific 

convolutional refinement blocks and fully-connected (FC) layers. FC-layer outputs are 

added to the outputs of finer levels of the hierarchy before ReLU activation and 

classification with a linear classifier. 13 

improves separation between classes in the same hierarchical level.  DL-based models 

require large amounts of data to be trained, both for adequate recognition of features and to 

avoid overfitting of the data. The latter arises where the model has the capacity to 

effectively ‘memorise’ all samples it has trained on and generalises poorly to unseen 

samples. Balancing the number of training samples to the least frequent class would 

dramatically reduce the size of the dataset available for training and increase the risk of 

overfitting. Instead, we applied the class-balanced weighting scheme described by  Cui et 

al. (2019)  to both loss functions to compensate for the imbalance in the number of samples. 

Rather than applying inverse class frequency directly, this approach increases the loss of 

classes with fewer samples to compensate for the dominance of head classes. Let  C denote 

the set of all hierarchy classes and  Cl ⊆C the subset of classes belonging to hierarchy level 

l. For each hierarchy class  j ∈Cl with  nj training samples, an effective-number weight  ~w is 

calculated  as 

~w j = 1− β

1− βn j

, (1)

where  β ∈ [0,1) controls the strength of class balancing. 

These weights are then normalised to have a mean value of one: 

w j   

> (node )

=

~w j

¯w , where ¯w = 1

|C | ∑ 

> k∈C

~wk , (2)

From preliminary experiments, w e use d an empirically determined value for  β (0.999995) 

to provide strong class balancing. 

We first present the tree loss ( Lhier ; Equation  3), adapted from Chen et al., (2022). The tree 

loss employs a “state space” matrix 

S ∈ RM ×|C|,

whose rows correspond to legal hierarchical states and whose columns correspond to 

classes in the hierarchy. Here  M denotes the total number of legal states represented in the 

hierarchy. For each sample  b, the model produces a vector of sigmoid probabilities 

Fb ∈ [ 0,1 ]|C|.

For a ground-truth class  yb, let 

A yb

= {m ∈ {1 ,... , M } | Sm , yb

> 0}14 

denote the set of legal states in which class  yb is active. Each state  m is assigned a weight 

wm, derived from the effective-number class weight  w j   

> (node )

defined in Equation  2. The 

partition function for sample  b is then 

Zb = ∑  

> m=1
> M

wm eSm 

> ⊤Fb

.

The hierarchical loss is then calculated as 

Lhier ( F , y ) = 1

| Bvalid | ∑  

> b∈Bvalid

− ln ( ∑   

> m∈Ayb

wm e( Sm  

> ┬Fb)

Zb

# ), (3)

where 

Bvalid = {b ∈ {1 ,... , B } | yb ∈ C }

is the set of samples with a valid class label for the hierarchy level under consideration. 

The cross-entropy loss is applied independently to each level in the hierarchy and improves 

separation between classes on short branches and with fewer  child classes, that benefit less 

from the hierarchical loss (e.g.  Dermaptera , Mecoptera ). The same effective-number 

weighting formulation (Equation  1) was applied to the cross-entropy loss, but normalised 

independently within each hierarchy level to maintain comparable loss magnitudes across 

levels.  First, for hierarchy level  l we calculate the softmax probability  p of class  k for 

sample  b: 

pb , k   

> (l)

= ezb , k  

> (l)

# ∑  

> j=1
> |Cl|

ezb , j  

> (l)

, (4)

where  zb , k   

> (l)

is the classifier logit for class  k at level  l.

Mutual exclusivity of classes is particularly important at the coarser levels in the hierarchy, 

where a distinction between taxonomically distant orders (such as  Diptera  and 

Hymenoptera ) is more critical to correct coarse-to-fine classification than between closely 

related genera.  The cross-entropy loss was therefore weighted more strongly on the coarser 

level,  using a variant of the method described in  (Bertinetto et al., 2019)  with initial  α = 1.5 

decreasing in equal steps to 0.3 over 30 epochs. Let  dl denote the depth of hierarchy level  l,

with the root level assigned depth 0.  The level weighting  wl is calculated with 

wl = e− α ⋅ dl

, (5)

then normalised across all levels  L of the hierarchy: 15 

^W l = e− α ⋅ dl

# ∑  

> r=1
> L

e− α ⋅ dr

. (6)

In addition to this per-level weighting  ^W , we also apply the previously described per-class 

weighting  w (Equation  Error: Reference source not found ) to the cross-entropy loss and 

sum them to give the total cross-entropy loss  LCE  for all valid samples in the batch  B:

LCE = 1

| Bvalid | ∑  

> b∈Bvalid

# (∑  

> l=1
> L

^W l ⋅ w yb     

> (l)
> (l)

⋅(− ln pb , yb    

> (l)
> (l)

# )). (7)

Finally, we sum the tree loss and cross-entropy loss to give the total loss: 

Ltotal = Lhier + LCE . (8)

During inference, the same hierarchical state-space matrix  S, introduced for the 

hierarchical loss during training, was  used to score all legal taxonomic states. The sigmoid 

outputs from all hierarchy classes were concatenated into a single prediction vector  Fb for 

sample  b. T he score of legal state  m was then calculated as 

qm , b = Sm 

> ┬

Fb , (9)

where  Sm denotes row  m of the state-space matrix.  The most probable legal hierarchical 

state was then selected using maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) inference: 

mb 

> *

= arg max 

> m

qm , b (10 )

The hierarchy classes active in state  mb 

> *

form a taxonomically consistent prediction path 

from the coarsest available level to the deepest predicted level. To accommodate varying 

levels of prediction certainty, a confidence-threshold strategy was applied. Starting from 

the deepest predicted class in the MAP path, the prediction was accepted if the sigmoid 

confidence associated with that class exceeded a predefined threshold,  T = 0.6. Otherwise 

the prediction was truncated to the next coarsest level and the confidence was reassessed. 

We selected this threshold to maximise the nu mber of confident predictions (see Section 16 

4.2.2  for a comparison of probability thresholds). The  threshold was not applied to L1, to 

ensure a prediction at the coarsest level was always made. 

## 3.3  Experimental setup 

In this section, we detail our experimental setup, including splitting the dataset for training 

validation and testing, the data augmentation methods that we applied, the metrics we used 

to assess the model’s performance and the details of the hyperparameter optimisation. 

3.3.1  Data splits and augmentation 

When splitting the dataset into training, validation and test subsets, cropped images 

extracted from one video are assumed to be of the same specimen. Due to the motion-

activated recording in the FAIR-Device, in several cases multiple videos of the same 

individual were made between entry into and exit from the device, in particular for 

specimens that moved intermittently. To avoid data leakage, a filter was applied to the 

dataset to ensure that images for a given class that were recorded on the same day and with 

the same device were only used in one of the subsets, as it was deemed that for such videos 

there would be a high likelihood that the same individual would be present in multiple 

videos. For this reason, the number of images (as opposed to the number of videos) was 

used as the number of samples, in particular for the calculation of class-based weighting in 

the loss function. 

The number of samples per class and subset is detailed in Table S2. We applied a minimum 

of 450 images per class for training and validation, and 150 for testing, based on empirical 

checks that these provided sufficient samples. An upper limit of 18000 images for training 

and 6000 for testing, per class, was applied, employing random sampling while 

maintaining the within-day, within-device constraint described above to avoid data 

leakage. The upper limit was applied due to the extreme imbalance between head and tail 

classes (e.g.  Diptera  having 703 times as many images as  Dermaptera ). Nevertheless, the 

data splits remained highly imbalanced, as detailed in Table S2.  The minimum and 

maximum numbers of images relate to the finest hierarchy level available for those 

samples. This means that the number of images for a class is the sum of the number of 

images for all its child classes plus the samples labelled only at its class. Due to the nature 

of the hierarchies with differing numbers of child classes for each parent class, imbalances 

exist in the number of images at coarser levels in the hierarchy, even if the child classes 

have a balanced number of images. 

Transformation and augmentation of the samples was applied during training to augment 

the dataset and to improve the ability of the model to generalise. The transformations 

applied to the training set included resize, random crop, flip and rotation, colour jitter, 

random affine translation and  random_erase  (2-15%) before normalisation. Resize and 

centre crop were used on the test images before normalising. 17  

> 3.3.2

Evaluation metrics 

We report the coverage per level and per class, comprising the percentage of ground-truth 

samples for which predictions are made and which exceed the probability threshold. The 

performance of the model on the test set was assessed on a per-class and per-level-of-

hierarchy basis. Per-class metrics of precision, recall, F1 and average confidence were 

recorded, to determine the model’s ability to distinguish between often visually similar 

classes. We also tested the hypothesis that incorrect predictions in a hierarchical model are 

more likely to be taxonomically related to the ground-truth class than to an unrelated class. 

Here we reported what percentage of incorrect predictions (false negatives of a class) share 

a common parent class with the correct class. For example, if a sample with a ground-truth 

label  Oestroidea  is misclassified, we report what percentage of those incorrect predictions 

are members of  Muscomorpha  (the parent class of  Oestroidea) .

On a per-level basis, performance is measured with accuracy-on-covered 2 and Matthews 

correlation coefficient (MCC). While a model that defaults to predicting the dominant class 

all the time may have high accuracy, a high MCC is dependent on all classes, including 

minority classes, being correctly predicted.  

> 3.3.3

Hyperparameter optimisation and model training 

Training over 100 epochs followed a progressive resize schedule for the input images of 

96x96 px (epochs 0-9), 112x112 px (epochs 10-19) and 128x128 px (epochs 20-99). We 

based the starting input size on the modal image size of the dataset (90x90 px for 2023 

data, see Figure S1). Optimisation used Stochastic Gradient Descent with momentum of 

0.9 and weight decay 0.001. A cyclical learning-rate scheduler with a peak learning rate of 

2.5 times the initial rate and 40 epochs warm-up was used. Regularisation with dropout of 

0.2 and 0.5 was used on the convolutional and fully-connected layers, respectively. 

Optimisation of the backbone learning rate (range: 0.00005-0.01), classifier learning rate 

(range: 0.00001-0.01) and batch size (range: 512-4096) was carried  out using evolutionary 

multi-objective optimisation on the training and validation splits. This method uses search 

algorithms to simultaneously optimise multiple objectives, maintaining a diverse set of 

solutions representing trade-offs, known as the Pareto front. New trials dominate existing 

ones when they are at least as good on all objectives and better on at least one objective. 

The objective was to maximise the MCC on the validation set, for each of the five levels in 

the hierarchy. We ran an initial experiment of 30 trials, which showed a pattern of 

convergence and added additional trials based on available compute resources (total 

n_trials  = 77 ). The model was  retrained with the combined training and validation data and 

tested on the unseen test set with the parameters from the optimisation trial with highest 

averaged validation MCC (backbone  learning rate: 0.00043, classifier learning rate: 

0.00075, batch size: 1024). Code was written in Python and the model was trained on a  

> 2Accuracy-on-covered denotes the accuracy of predictions, based on the subset of samples for which a
> prediction exceeds the defined threshold of confidence (i.e., the coverage).

18 

server featuring an AMD EPYC 9334 32-Core Processor with 1.1TiB of RAM, equipped 

with four NVIDIA RTX 4500 Ada Generation GPUs 

# 4 Results and discussion 

In this section we first provide an overview of the results of our hierarchical invertebrate 

model (see Section  3.2 ), developed and tested on the manually-curated dataset we present 

(see Section  3.1.2 ).  We then provide a detailed analysis of per-class and per-level 

performance, including rare-class classification, visually similar taxa, and the effect of the 

confidence threshold, before discussing our results in the context of related work and 

outlining limitations and future directions. 

## 4.1  Results overview 

The performance of our arthropod classification model is summarised in  Table 1 , showing 

the per-level and per-class metrics for the test set. The model achieved a minimum per-

level accuracy-on-covered  of 0.8174 (range 0.8174 – 0.9882). The MCC scores indicate 

that the evenness of predictions improved from L1 through L5. We would expect the MCC 

to be higher at L5, the most balanced level, but even for the highly imbalanced L2 level the 

MCC of 0.7198 demonstrates that the class-balancing weighting seems to be effective. The 

appropriateness of MCC as a key metric is confirmed at the coarsest level of the hierarchy 

(L1), where the combined accuracy of over 98 percent hides the fact that the rare class 

Arachnida  has a recall score of 0.1682 and so is often misclassified as  Insecta . The low 

recall for  Arachnida  is likely a combination of the effect of low sample numbers ( n = 829) 

and significant occlusions on images for this class. These are discussed in more detail in 

Section  4.2.3 .19 

Table  1: Per-level and per-class metrics for the test set, where L1 represents the coarsest 

level of root classes (Insecta and Arachnida) and L5 the finest level. Coverage, Accuracy-

on-covered and MCC are reported per level. Coverage, Precision, Recall and F1e are 

reported per class. Additionally, for levels L3-L5 we provide a metric on the frequency that 

false negatives for a class share a common parent with the ground truth label. Confidence 

threshold  T =  0.6. 

Hierarchy 

level 

Coverage 

(%)  ↑

Accuracy 

on 

covered  ↑ MCC  ↑ Class 

Class 

Coverage 

(%)  ↑ Precision  ↑ Recall  ↑ F1  ↑

False negative 

with common 

parent class  ↑

L1  100  0.9882  0.2489  Insecta  100  0.9909  0.9973  0.9941  -

Arachnida  100  0.3959  0.1628  0.2308  -

L2  93.80  0.8317  0.7198 

Coleoptera  88.22  0.8246  0.6197  0.7076  -

Diptera  98.05  0.8373  0.9087  0.8715  -

Hymenoptera  96.21  0.8185  0.6525  0.7261  -

Lepidoptera  83.68  0.6482  0.4036  0.4974  -

Dermaptera  16.14  0.4894  0.1614  0.2427  -

Orthoptera  82.42  0.9750  0.7756  0.8639  -

Mecoptera  78.19  0.6579  0.6597  0.6588  -

L3  95.54  0.8174  0.6840 

Apocrita  98.19  0.8141  0.7838  0.7986  0.0053 

Brachycera  99.06  0.8285  0.9198  0.8717  0.0687 

Nematocera  90.19  0.8425  0.6455  0.7310  0.3425 

Anthicidae  85.39  0.5911  0.6742  0.6299  0.0 

Coccinelloidea  94.92  0.9527  0.8493  0.8981  0.1536 

Chrysomeloidea  73.50  0.0  0.0  0.0  0.0349 

Heterocera  84.73  0.6201  0.3792  0.4706  0.0 

Symphyta  87.37  0.9052  0.1553  0.2651  0.092 

Curculionoidea  73.42  0.4456  0.1827  0.2556  0.0108 

L4  95.82  0.8728  0.7814 

Aculeata  96.38  0.8930  0.7609  0.8217  0.3434 

Asilomorpha  99.47  0.8877  0.8060  0.8449  0.8473 

Muscomorpha  95.68  0.9045  0.8876  0.8960  0.2714 

Bibionidae  99.82  0.8224  0.9584  0.8852  0.0 

Parasitica  84.28  0.5112  0.5369  0.5237  0.1563 

L5  92.54  0.8230  0.7966 

Formicidae  89.50  0.9852  0.7670  0.8625  0.0 

Empidoidea  75.32  0.3684  0.03636  0.0662  0.3080 

Oestroidea  96.10  0.8224  0.7462  0.7824  0.7493 

Ephydroidea  99.59  0.8907  0.3869  0.5394  1.0 

Syrphidae  91.05  0.8626  0.7547  0.8050  0.5070 

Lauxanioidea  82.63  0.9652  0.7339  0.8338  0.9942 

Muscoidea  97.12  0.6313  0.9083  0.7449  0.7342 

Asiloidea  98.62  0.8945  0.8412  0.8670  0.0 

Sepsidae  95.10  0.9559  0.1275  0.2249  0.9929 

Tephritidae  98.25  0.7036  0.5664  0.6276  1.0 

Vespidae  87.23  0.6277  0.7220  0.6715  0.0196 20 

## 4.2  Results Analysis 

Following the overview of results presented in Section  4.1  we will now present a more 

detailed analysis of our findings, including the effects of class balancing to correct for 

dataset imbalance, the performance of the model on visually-similar insects and the impact 

of the probability threshold on the number of predictions per level. 

Looking at the results for the individual classes, 13 of the 34 classes in the test set have F1-

scores above 0.8. High F1-scores are observed at all hierarchical levels and irrespective of 

branch depth.  To assess the overall effect of class-balanced weighting, we plotted the 

number of sample images per class against the test F1-scores (see  Figure 5 ). The number of 

images per class explains less than one third of the variation of test F1-scores ( R2 =

0.3520 ),  suggesting that a model can perform well on the tail classes of a highly-

imbalanced dataset, when class-balanced weighting is applied during training. For 

example, for the class  Bibionidae  (n = 3,060 ), representing only 1.15 percent of the dataset, 

the model achieved an F1-score of 0.8852. Furthermore, the 3,060 images of  Bibionidae 

were extracted from four videos of one individual recorded over ten minutes on 

24.08.2023, while the test images were from one video of one individual, comprising 1 

minute 35 seconds of video recorded on 30.08.2023. This indicates that the model is 

capable of highly accurate prediction on individual classes even when trained on few 

samples. We note, however, that this result reflects a single individual and may not 

generalise to specimens photographed at different sites, seasons, or under different 

lighting. 21  

> 4.2.1

Distinguishing between visually similar insects 

Since the classification model we developed solely relies on image data, visual similarity 

of different insects is a potential reason for misclassifications. Considering the visually-

similar but distantly-related  Vespidae  and  Syrphidae , the model misclassifies 334 of 6000 

samples (5.57 percent) of  Syrphidae  as  Vespidae  and 92 of 1018 samples (9.04 percent) of 

Vespidae  as  Syrphidae . Individually, the classes have recall  scores of 0.7547 for  Syrphidae 

and 0.7220 for  Vespidae .

For the closely related and often visually similar subclasses of  Muscomorpha  (Oestroidea, 

Ephydroidea, Tephritidae, Lauxanioidea, Sepsidae, Syrphidae  and  Muscoidea ) our model 

achieved high precision scores (range: 0.6313-0.9652). When misclassification does occur, 

there is a high tendency for these classes to be misclassified as  Muscoidea , rather than a 

more distantly-related class (see the L5 confusion matrix in  Figure 6 ). This is confirmed by 

the high scores for these classes for false negatives with a common parent class in  Table 1 .

Figure  5: F1-score as a function of the number of images per class (logarithmic). The 

number of images per class correlates weakly with the F1-score. The model also achieves 

high F1-scores on rarer classes, such Bibionidae, indicating that number of images is not 

the sole determinant of per-class performance. 22  

> 4.2.2

Classification at different hierarchy levels 

The accuracy of the model to predict to the correct depth in the hierarchy, as well as the 

effect of the threshold of probability on the number of predictions per level is detailed in 

Table 2 . The model predicts to a shorter depth than the ground truth label in seven percent 

of samples at the deepest level of the hierarchy (L5), decreasing to 0.28 percent for the L2 

level. Predictions for levels deeper than their assigned label were disregarded as they had 

no ground truth to validate the correctness of predictions. For predictions with valid ground 

truth labels, a threshold of  T = 0.6  resulted in at least 92.54 percent  of predictions being 

Figure  6: Confusion matrix of L5 of the hierarchy. Rows represent the ground truth, 

columns represent predictions exceeding the confidence threshold ( T =  0.6). Cells show 

sample counts and, in parentheses, row-normalised fractions. Colours indicate row-

normalised fractions. 23 

made without reverting to a coarser level. At the L2 level, almost six percent of predictions 

do not meet the threshold; without the hierarchical fallback mechanism, these samples 

would have no valid prediction at all. 

Table  2: Percentage of predictions made at each hierarchy level that meet or exceed the 

defined probability threshold ( T =  0.6)                                   

> Hierarchy level Number of
> samples
> Prediction depth before thresholding Samples below
> threshold (T = 0.6)
> (%)
> Coverage
> (predictions
> exceeding
> threshold
> (T = 0.6 ) (%)
> Shorter than
> ground truth (%)
> Same as ground
> truth (%)
> Longer than
> ground truth (%)
> L1 76,384 0.00 96.80 3.20 0.00 100
> L2 73,805 0.28 96.55 3.16 5.92 93.80
> L3 66,046 0.32 78.13 21.50 4.13 95.54
> L4 42,676 3.29 92.90 3.80 0.89 95.82
> L5 38,377 7.00 93.00 0.00 0.46 92.54

We additionally compared the effect of varying threshold levels on the coverage and 

accuracy-on-covered (illustrated in  Figure 7 ). Aside from level L1, where thresholding is 

not applied, an increased probability threshold results in reduced coverage and increased 

accuracy-on-covered. Coverage for levels L2-L5 is highest for  T =  0.4  (range: 0.93-0.98), 

while being substantially lower when tested at the higher probability threshold of  T =  0.9 

(range: 0.77-0.89). As the probability threshold increases, the accuracy of predictions 

meeting this threshold increases. Accuracy-on-covered for levels L2-L5 is highest for  T = 

0.9 (range 0.85-0.92), while for  T =  0.4 accuracy is in the lower range of 0.80-0.87. 

Figure  7: Coverage (left panel) and accuracy-on-covered (right panel) for a range of 

probability thresholds ( T =  0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 0.9) for each level of the hierarchy (L1-L5). 

Coverage decreases, while accuracy increases, with increasing threshold values. 24 

4.2.3  Model Limitations 

Having presented the results and analysis of the model we now analyse some of the 

limitations of the model, in particular for classes that had particularly low F1-scores and 

possible reasons for this. 

While balancing the loss function to improve learning on rare classes can be effective for 

highly imbalanced datasets, a lack of data still negatively affects the model’s ability to 

correctly predict rare classes. This can be seen in  Figure 8 , where the number of images per 

class multiplied by the average image size i.e., the total number of pixels seen by the 

model per class, is plotted against the F1-scores. The average image size is capped to the 

maximum input size of the model, not the raw image size. The total pixels per class 

account for more of the variation (R 2 = 0.4466) of the F1-score than number of images per 

class alone and suggests that the model does not learn well on classes with low sample 

counts combined with low resolution. 

Extensive augmentations and transformations were applied during training to reduce the 

risk of overfitting and improve the ability of the model to generalise to unseen data.  One 

Figure  8: F1-score as a function of the total number of pixels per class (number of 

images*image size, logarithmic scale). Total pixels per class explains more of the variation 

in F1-scores than number of images per class. 25 

augmentation technique we employed is  random erasing , wh ich randomly replaced two to 

15 percent of the sample image with a light grey rectangle, thus forcing the model to learn 

from other visible features. While generally a beneficial method,  Figure 3  shows an 

example of specimens of  Dermaptera  and  Arachnida , which  already suffer from occlusion 

from the camera trap itself. In these cases  random erasing  may remove too much detail for 

effective learning of features. 

The leaf nodes of the hierarchy represent taxa spanning multiple species, genera or 

families, that share a common parent node (see Section  3.1.3 ). Although members of a 

class are likely to be visually similar, the limitations of this approach must be recognised 

when working with classes of high intra-group variation and low sample numbers. This is 

illustrated in the case of the class  Chrysomeloidea  (Figure 10 ) that had precision, recall and 

F1-scores during testing of 0.0 ( n_samples  = 351). The four specimens labelled as 

Chrysomeloidea  are visually different to one another, to the extent that the model did not 

learn common identifying features and misclassified all samples in the test set. 

Figure  9: Occluded specimens of the classes Dermaptera (a) and (b) and Arachnida (c) 

and (d). 

Figure  10 : The four specimens of Chrysomeloidea demonstrate the domain shift between 

train and test splits. Specimens (a) and (b) were used in training, samples (c) and (d) in 

testing. 26 

## 4.3  Discussion 

The potential for automated insect camera traps to generate data (e.g. video, time-lapse 

photographs, cropped images) for model training has been used by other researchers 

(Bjerge et al., 2023a; Sittinger et al., 2024)  and in our case resulted in a curated dataset of 

almost one million images. In contrast to the downward-facing cameras observing a 

horizontal platform or substrate, used in the two referenced works (see  Figure 1 , (a) and 

(b)), our dataset is based on videos of insects passing through a camera trap. This resulted 

in highly varied poses of the specimens, which benefits training data. With accurate 

tracking of specimens, a single labelled video can produce thousands of cropped images 

for model development. While this can alleviate a key bottleneck to DL-based model 

development – namely a lack of sufficient labelled data – accurately labelling specimens in 

videos or photographs still requires expert curation to ensure reliability of the data. This in 

particular is the case for very small insects, whose identification for labelling may be 

limited by the resolution of the images. 

Our results demonstrate the architecture’s ability to classify rare classes and visually 

similar classes, as well as correcting for dataset imbalance. This is notable relative to other 

hierarchical and flat models, where training on highly imbalanced datasets has not been 

directly addressed. Despite these positive results, the model is limited by the data available 

for training. Two situations resulted in poor performance: (i) classes with low resolution 

combined with low sample numbers and (ii) low-sample classes where all specimens are 

visually distinct from one another. Changes to the model architecture and increasing the 

camera resolution may address the first situation. Increased resolution would, however, 

require more storage capacity for recorded images, increased processing demands for on-

device classification and may shift the limit of resolution to even smaller insects that 

heretofore have not been part of the curated dataset. Depending on the use case, the exact 

determination of insects will always be limited with camera traps, as distinguishing 

features may not be visible to the device. Regarding the issue of visually-heterogenous 

classes, careful consideration must be given during annotation to taxa with high intra-class 

variability, increasing the sample size or merging these taxa with their parent class. 

Our adaptation of the model architecture from  Chen et al. (2022)  to a 5-level hierarchy 

confirms the flexibility of this architecture. We observed strong performing classes at every 

level, or depth, of the hierarchy. While other examples of hierarchical classification 

assigned a specific taxonomic rank to each level of the hierarchy (e.g. order-family-

species)  (Bjerge et al., 2023b; Chang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022; Elhamod et al., 2022) ,

our model implements a more flexible approach that can be adapted to available labels and 

does not require all classes to be labelled to species level. The progressive reduction in the 

number of unclassified samples, through the application of the probability threshold and 

reclassification at coarser levels, underscores the usefulness of multi-granularity 

classification to minimise uncertain predictions and unclassified samples. Additionally the 

choice of threshold allows for the number of, or confidence of, predictions to be 

prioritised. However, for all the benefits of a hierarchical model, expanding the hierarchy 27 

to include more levels must be assessed critically in the context of the available data. Each 

additional level adds complexity to the model, increasing the number of trainable 

parameters and thus the need for more data and/or augmentations and adjustment of 

training schedules to avoid overfitting. 

While this work has created a new hierarchical dataset of insects and performed well on 

the test subset of this dataset, future work could test the model on unseen species from the 

same parent groups as this dataset. The results presented here are also based on a limited 

number of taxa collected in Germany, although they represent many of the common orders 

of insects found worldwide. 

Monitoring of insects with automated camera traps requires a number of distinct processes 

to work together, including specimen detection, tracking, classification and enumeration. 

The classification method presented in this paper needs integration with the other processes 

to fully realise its potential in real-time biodiversity monitoring. This would require further 

research to ensure, not only that these task-specific components are compatible with one 

another, but also that they fulfil the requirements for working in the field. While this model 

uses a relatively lightweight ResNet18 backbone, comparison with other backbones would 

facilitate the decision between model accuracy and suitability for running in low-powered, 

remote monitoring devices. To this end the model has already been coded to be compatible 

with a number of backbones, including other ResNet  (He et al., 2015)  and MobileNet 

(Howard et al., 2017)  feature extractors. Beyond this, pruning and quantizing the model to 

further reduce power consumption and optimise it for running on small edge devices could 

be undertaken to facilitate its use in remote automated insect camera traps. 

# 5 Conclusion 

Applying DL to insect classification for biodiversity monitoring requires expert-annotated 

data that are costly and time-consuming to acquire. At the same time, flat classification 

models are known to struggle to generalise well for large numbers of classes of varying 

granularity and imbalanced training data. We address these challenges with a hierarchical 

dataset extracted from automated camera trap recordings and a hierarchical image 

classification model with class-balanced weighting. Our model performs well on head and 

tail classes and distinguishes between visually similar classes. Furthermore we leverage the 

hierarchy to maximise the confidence of predictions and minimise unclassified samples. 

We hope that our work, i.e., both the dataset we constructed and the model we developed, 

will serve as the basis of future research in the context of AI-based biodiversity 

monitoring. 28 

# 6 Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies 

# in the manuscript preparation process 

During the preparation of this work, the authors used Microsoft Copilot to assist with 

improving the clarity, consistency and completeness of the mathematical notation and 

descriptions of the hierarchical loss and inference procedures described in Section  3.3 .

After using this tool, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full 

responsibility for the content of the published article. 

# 7 References 

Bertinetto, L., Mueller, R., Tertikas, K., Samangooei, S., Lord, N.A., 2019. Making Better 

Mistakes: Leveraging Class Hierarchies with Deep Networks. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1912.09393 

Bjerge, K., Alison, J., Dyrmann, M., Frigaard, C.E., Mann, H.M.R., Høye, T.T., 2023a. 

Accurate detection and identification of insects from camera trap images with deep 

learning. PLOS Sustain Transform 2, e0000051. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pstr.0000051 

Bjerge, K., Geissmann, Q., Alison, J., Mann, H.M.R., Høye, T.T., Dyrmann, M., Karstoft, 

H., 2023b. Hierarchical classification of insects with multitask learning and 

anomaly detection. Ecological Informatics 77, 102278. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2023.102278 

Bjerge, K., Mann, H.M.R., Høye, T.T., 2022. Real‐time insect tracking and monitoring 

with computer vision and deep learning. Remote Sens Ecol Conserv 8, 315–327. 

https://doi.org/10.1002/rse2.245 

Chang, D., Pang, K., Zheng, Y., Ma, Z., Song, Y.-Z., Guo, J., 2021. Your “Flamingo” is My 

“Bird”: Fine-Grained, or Not, in: 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision 

and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). Presented at the 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on 

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE, Nashville, TN, USA, pp. 

11471–11480. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01131 

Chen, J., Wang, P., Liu, J., Qian, Y., 2022. Label Relation Graphs Enhanced Hierarchical 

Residual Network for Hierarchical Multi-Granularity Classification, in: 2022 

IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 

Presented at the 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern 

Recognition (CVPR), IEEE, New Orleans, LA, USA, pp. 4848–4857. 

https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.00481 29 

Chiavassa, J.A., Kraft, M., Noack, P., Walther, S., Kirse, A., Scherber, C., 2024. The Field 

Automatic Insect Recognition‐Device—A Non‐Lethal Semi‐Automatic Malaise 

Trap for Insect Biodiversity Monitoring: Proof of Concept. Ecology and Evolution 

14, e70642. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.70642 

Cui, Y., Jia, M., Lin, T.-Y., Song, Y., Belongie, S., 2019. Class-Balanced Loss Based on 

Effective Number of Samples, in: 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision 

and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). Presented at the 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on 

Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE, Long Beach, CA, USA, 

pp. 9260–9269. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2019.00949 

Dainese, M., Martin, E.A., Aizen, M.A., Albrecht, M., Bartomeus, I., Bommarco, R., 

Carvalheiro, L.G., Chaplin-Kramer, R., Gagic, V., Garibaldi, L.A., Ghazoul, J., 

Grab, H., Jonsson, M., Karp, D.S., Kennedy, C.M., Kleijn, D., Kremen, C., Landis, 

D.A., Letourneau, D.K., Marini, L., Poveda, K., Rader, R., Smith, H.G., 

Tscharntke, T., Andersson, G.K.S., Badenhausser, I., Baensch, S., Bezerra, A.D.M., 

Bianchi, F.J.J.A., Boreux, V., Bretagnolle, V., Caballero-Lopez, B., Cavigliasso, P., 

Ćetković, A., Chacoff, N.P., Classen, A., Cusser, S., Da Silva E Silva, F.D., De 

Groot, G.A., Dudenhöffer, J.H., Ekroos, J., Fijen, T., Franck, P., Freitas, B.M., 

Garratt, M.P.D., Gratton, C., Hipólito, J., Holzschuh, A., Hunt, L., Iverson, A.L., 

Jha, S., Keasar, T., Kim, T.N., Kishinevsky, M., Klatt, B.K., Klein, A.-M., 

Krewenka, K.M., Krishnan, S., Larsen, A.E., Lavigne, C., Liere, H., Maas, B., 

Mallinger, R.E., Martinez Pachon, E., Martínez-Salinas, A., Meehan, T.D., 

Mitchell, M.G.E., Molina, G.A.R., Nesper, M., Nilsson, L., O’Rourke, M.E., 

Peters, M.K., Plećaš, M., Potts, S.G., Ramos, D.D.L., Rosenheim, J.A., Rundlöf, 

M., Rusch, A., Sáez, A., Scheper, J., Schleuning, M., Schmack, J.M., Sciligo, A.R., 

Seymour, C., Stanley, D.A., Stewart, R., Stout, J.C., Sutter, L., Takada, M.B., Taki, 

H., Tamburini, G., Tschumi, M., Viana, B.F., Westphal, C., Willcox, B.K., Wratten, 

S.D., Yoshioka, A., Zaragoza-Trello, C., Zhang, W., Zou, Y., Steffan-Dewenter, I., 

2019. A global synthesis reveals biodiversity-mediated benefits for crop production. 

Sci. Adv. 5, eaax0121. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aax0121 

Deng, J., Ding, N., Jia, Y., Frome, A., Murphy, K., Bengio, S., Li, Y., Neven, H., Adam, H., 

2014. Large-Scale Object Classification Using Label Relation Graphs, in: Fleet, D., 

Pajdla, T., Schiele, B., Tuytelaars, T. (Eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2014, 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 

48–64. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10590-1_4 

Elhamod, M., Diamond, K.M., Maga, A.M., Bakis, Y., Bart Jr., H.L., Mabee, P., Dahdul, 

W., Leipzig, J., Greenberg, J., Avants, B., Karpatne, A., 2022. Hierarchy-guided 

neural network for species classification. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 13, 

642–652. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.13768 30 

Engelhardt, E.K., Biber, M.F., Dolek, M., Fartmann, T., Hochkirch, A., Leidinger, J., 

Löffler, F., Pinkert, S., Poniatowski, D., Voith, J., Winterholler, M., Zeuss, D., 

Bowler, D.E., Hof, C., 2022. Consistent signals of a warming climate in occupancy 

changes of three insect taxa over 40 years in central Europe. Global Change 

Biology 28, 3998–4012. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.16200 

European Commission. Directorate General for Environment., 2022. European Red List of 

insect taxonomists. Publications Office, LU. 

Hallmann, C.A., Sorg, M., Jongejans, E., Siepel, H., Hofland, N., Schwan, H., Stenmans, 

W., Müller, A., Sumser, H., Hörren, T., Goulson, D., De Kroon, H., 2017. More 

than 75 percent decline over 27 years in total flying insect biomass in protected 

areas. PLoS ONE 12, e0185809. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0185809 

He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J., 2015. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1512.03385 

Howard, A.G., Zhu, M., Chen, B., Kalenichenko, D., Wang, W., Weyand, T., Andreetto, 

M., Adam, H., 2017. MobileNets: Efficient Convolutional Neural Networks for 

Mobile Vision Applications. https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.1704.04861 

Høye, T.T., Ärje, J., Bjerge, K., Hansen, O.L.P., Iosifidis, A., Leese, F., Mann, H.M.R., 

Meissner, K., Melvad, C., Raitoharju, J., 2021. Deep learning and computer vision 

will transform entomology. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118, 

e2002545117. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2002545117 

Montgomery, G.A., Belitz, M.W., Guralnick, R.P., Tingley, M.W., 2021. Standards and 

Best Practices for Monitoring and Benchmarking Insects. Front. Ecol. Evol. 8, 

579193. https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2020.579193 

Ollerton, J., 2017. Pollinator Diversity: Distribution, Ecological Function, and 

Conservation. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics 48, 353–376. 

https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-ecolsys-110316-022919 

Preti, M., Verheggen, F., Angeli, S., 2021. Insect pest monitoring with camera-equipped 

traps: strengths and limitations. J Pest Sci 94, 203–217. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10340-020-01309-4 

Schneider, S., Greenberg, S., Taylor, G.W., Kremer, S.C., 2020. Three critical factors 

affecting automated image species recognition performance for camera traps. 

Ecology and Evolution 10, 3503–3517. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.6147 

Sittinger, M., Uhler, J., Pink, M., Herz, A., 2024. Insect detect: An open-source DIY 

camera trap for automated insect monitoring. PLoS ONE 19, e0295474. 

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0295474 31 

Stark, T., Ştefan, V., Wurm, M., Spanier, R., Taubenböck, H., Knight, T.M., 2023. YOLO 

object detection models can locate and classify broad groups of flower-visiting 

arthropods in images. Sci Rep 13. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-43482-3 

Teixeira, A.C., Ribeiro, J., Morais, R., Sousa, J.J., Cunha, A., 2023. A Systematic Review 

on Automatic Insect Detection Using Deep Learning. Agriculture 13, 713. 

https://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture13030713 

Tian, Y., Wang, S., Li, E., Yang, G., Liang, Z., Tan, M., 2023. MD-YOLO: Multi-scale 

Dense YOLO for small target pest detection. Computers and Electronics in 

Agriculture 213, 108233. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2023.108233 

van Klink, R., August, T., Bas, Y., Bodesheim, P., Bonn, A., Fossøy, F., Høye, T.T., 

Jongejans, E., Menz, M.H.M., Miraldo, A., Roslin, T., Roy, H.E., Ruczyński, I., 

Schigel, D., Schäffler, L., Sheard, J.K., Svenningsen, C., Tschan, G.F., Wäldchen, 

J., Zizka, V.M.A., Åström, J., Bowler, D.E., 2022. Emerging technologies 

revolutionise insect ecology and monitoring. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 37, 

872–885. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2022.06.001 

Van Klink, R., Bowler, D.E., Gongalsky, K.B., Shen, M., Swengel, S.R., Chase, J.M., 

2024. Disproportionate declines of formerly abundant species underlie insect loss. 

Nature 628, 359–364. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-06861-4 

Wagner, D.L., Grames, E.M., Forister, M.L., Berenbaum, M.R., Stopak, D., 2021. Insect 

decline in the Anthropocene: Death by a thousand cuts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 

U.S.A. 118, e2023989118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2023989118 

Wallin, E., Kahl, F., Hammarstrand, L., 2025. ProHOC: Probabilistic Hierarchical Out-of-

Distribution Classification via Multi-Depth Networks. 

https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2503.21397 

Wildermuth, B., Bröcher, M., Ladouceur, E., Meyer, S.T., Schielzeth, H., Staab, M., 

Achury, R., Blüthgen, N., Hertzog, L., Hines, J., Roscher, C., Schweiger, O., 

Weisser, W.W., Ebeling, A., 2025. Arthropod species loss underpins biomass 

declines. Nat Ecol Evol 10, 83–94. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-025-02909-y 

Wu, T.-Y., Morgado, P., Wang, P., Ho, C.-H., Vasconcelos, N., 2020. Solving Long-Tailed 

Recognition with Deep Realistic Taxonomic Classifier, in: Vedaldi, A., Bischof, H., 

Brox, T., Frahm, J.-M. (Eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, Lecture Notes in 

Computer Science. Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 171–189. 

https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-58598-3_11 

Zalucki, M.P., Shabbir, A., Silva, R., Adamson, D., Shu-Sheng, L., Furlong, M.J., 2012. 

Estimating the Economic Cost of One of the World’s Major Insect Pests, 

<I>Plutella xylostella</I> (Lepidoptera: Plutellidae): Just How Long Is a Piece of 

String? jnl. econ. entom. 105, 1115–1129. https://doi.org/10.1603/EC12107 32 

CRediT authorship contribution statement 

Zaki Mahfoud: Methodology; Software; Validation; Data curation; Formal analysis; 

Writing – original draft; Visualization 

Juan A. Chiavassa: Conceptualization; Methodology; Validation; Data curation; Writing – 

review & editing; 

Simon Walther: Writing – review & editing; Supervision; Project administration; Funding 

acquisition. 

Florian Haselbeck: Conceptualization; Methodology; Writing – review &

editing;  Supervision; Project administration; 

Ehsan Yaghoubi:  Conceptualization; Methodology; Validation; Writing – review &

editing; Supervision; 

Funding 

We thank the Free State of Bavaria for funding the positions affiliated with the 

Professorship of Smart Farming within the framework of the Hightech Agenda Bavaria. 

The camera-trap device used to acquire the raw dataset used in this paper was developed as 

part of the joint project “Monitoring of biodiversity in agricultural landscapes” (MonViA) 

that was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture (BMEL). 

Declaration of competing interest 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 

relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

Data and code availability 

Dataset: available at:  10.5281/zenodo.21690971 

Python Code:  https://github.com/smAIL-WS/HierarchicalInsectClassification 33 

# Supplementary material 

Figure  S1: Graphs of cropped image size and aspect ratio, by year. A higher-resolution 

camera used in 2023 resulted in larger image sizes. The dataset exhibits large variation in 

image size (range: 156  px 2 - 300,300 px 2) and aspect ratio ( range: 0.21 - 4.167) , requiring 

transformation to avoid distortion during resizing to the model input size. 34 

Table  S1: Number of source videos and cropped images per class, sorted by hierarchy 

level. Highest and lowest numbers of source videos and cropped images for each level are 

marked green and red, respectively. 

Hierarchy 

level 

Class  Number of videos  Number of images (cumulative, 

including subclasses) 

Year: 2021  Year: 2023  Total  Total, including 

subclasses 

Total  411  1,390  1,801  1,801  939,722 

L1  Insecta  2 31  33  1754  722,663 

Arachnida  - 14  14  14  2,832 

L2 

Coleoptera  - - - 146  100,444 

Diptera  3 2 5 1,409  515,157 

Hymenoptera  - - - 90  53,905 

Lepidoptera  14  2 16  62  20,197 

Dermaptera  - 4 4 4 733 

Orthoptera  36  2 38  38  22,416 

Mecoptera  5 - 5 5 2,398 

L3 

Apocrita  1 - 1 82  50,829 

Brachycera  108  393  501  1,365  501,679 

Nematocera  14  20  34  39  12,959 

Anthicidae  6 - 6 6 3,846 

Coccinelloidea  7 119  126  126  72,876 

Chrysomeloidea  2 2 4 4 10,645 

Heterocera  36  10  46  46  17,115 

Symphyta  - 8 8 8 3,076 

Curculionoidea  8 2 10  10  13,077 

L4 

Aculeata  4 1 5 54  43,387 

Asilomorpha  - - - 81  26,516 

Muscomorpha  4 5 9 783  312,128 

Bibionidae  - 5 5 5 3,060 

Parasitica  19  8 27  27  e7,442 

L5 

Formicidae  16  - 16  16  40,064 

Empidoidea  21  1 22  22  2,418 

Oestroidea  10  57  67  67  15,958 

Ephydroidea  4 8 12  12  3,861 

Syrphidae  29  26  55  55  46,712 

Lauxanioidea  2 13  15  15  19,468 

Muscoidea  20  596  616  616  215,009 

Asiloidea  35  24  59  59  24,098 

Sepsidae  2 4 6 6 6,026 

Tephritidae  - 3 3 3 1,864 

Vespidae  3 30  33  33  3,323 35 

Table  S2: Data splits showing the number of images per class in the training, validation 

and test splits and the relative percentages of final training images (Train+Validation) of 

each class, per level of hierarchy and for all samples in the data split. 

Hierarchy level  Class 

Data split (No. of images)  % (Train+Val) of 

samples at 

hierarchy level 

% (Train+Val) 

of total samples Train  Validation  Retraining 

(Train+Val)  Test 

L1  Insecta  201,828  61,157  262,985  75,555  98.93  98.93 

Arachnida  2,400  432  2,832  829  1.07  1.07 

L2 

Coleoptera  34,224  11,344  45,568  9,551  17.83  17.14 

Diptera  104,208  32,627  136,835  40,544  53.54  51.48 

Hymenoptera  26,533  5,308  31,841  12,068  12.46  11.98 

Lepidoptera  14,133  6,064  20,197  4,903  7.90  7.60 

Dermaptera  557  176  733  285  0.29  0.28 

Orthoptera  15,445  2,555  18,000  5,734  7.04  6.77 

Mecoptera  1,766  632  2,398  720  0.94  0.90 

L3 

Apocrita  24,072  4,693  28,765  9,486  12.46  10.82 

Brachycera  93,374  29,983  123,357  38,035  53.44  46.41 

Nematocera  10,367  2,592  12,959  2,130  5.61  4.88 

Anthicidae  3,077  769  3,846  178  1.67  1.45 

Coccinelloidea  13,846  4,154  18,000  6,000  7.80  6.77 

Chrysomeloidea  8,516  2,129  10,645  351  4.61  4.00 

Heterocera  11,658  5,457  17,115  4,262  7.41  6.44 

Symphyta  2,461  615  3,076  2,582  1.33  1.16 

Curculionoidea  8,785  4,292  13,077  3,022  5.66  4.92 

L4 

Aculeata  17,486  3,837  21,323  7,018  15.54  8.02 

Asilomorpha  15,872  4,546  20,418  6,385  14.88  7.68 

Muscomorpha  63,641  21,298  84,939  25,650  61.92  31.95 

Bibionidae  2,448  612  3,060  1,155  2.23  1.15 

Parasitica  6,586  856  7,442  2,468  5.42  2.80 

L5 

Formicidae  14,850  3,150  18,000  6,000  14.58  6.77 

Empidoidea  1,705  713  2,418  385  1.96  0.91 

Oestroidea  10,462  5,496  15,958  5,126  12.93  6.00 

Ephydroidea  2,586  1,275  3,861  716  3.13  1.45 

Syrphidae  13,914  4,086  18,000  6,000  14.58  6.77 

Lauxanioidea  13,742  4,258  18,000  5,591  14.58  6.77 

Muscoidea  14,082  3,918  18,000  6,000  14.58  6.77 

Asiloidea  14,167  3,833  18,000  6,000  14.58  6.77 

Sepsidae  4,821  1,205  6,026  510  4.88  2.27 

Tephritidae  1,491  373  1,864  1,031  1.51  0.70 

Vespidae  2,636  687  3,323  1,018  2.69  1.25